The Joe Rogan experience.
It's something that people used to call the addictive personality.
We don't really call it that anymore.
We just use the idea of the disease model.
So we say that somebody has the disease of addiction.
It's a chronic relapsing and remitting problem.
People come to it with different degrees of vulnerability and the risk for it
can essentially be summarized as nature, nurture and neighborhood.
And just to briefly describe that if you have a biological parent or
grandparent with addiction,
you are increased risk compared the general population of getting addicted
yourself. If you have a co-occurring mental illness,
you are at increased risk of getting addicted.
If you have certain character traits, like you're more impulsive,
you have a hard time putting a break between the idea to do something and
actually doing it. You are, are you're at increased risk for addiction.
So that's kind of all in the sort of nature, um, risk at gory.
There's also the nurture piece of it.
So if you grow up in an environment where you experience a whole lot of trauma,
you are at increased risk for becoming addicted.
If you grow up in an environment where your caretakers model, um,
using drugs and alcohol or other addictive substances or behaviors as a coping,
you are an increased risk of becoming addicted,
or even if they just implicitly condone it.
And then that brings us to the whole neighborhood idea.
And this I think is an really underrecognized aspect of our risk for addiction,
which is just simple access.
So if you live in an environment where you have more access to highly
reinforcing drugs and behaviors, you're more likely to try them.
And just simply in being exposed,
especially with the increasing potency variety and novelty of drugs today,
your increased risk of becoming addicted.
So if you go see a doctor who's more free with their prescription pad,
you're exposed to opioids or benzos, you're more likely to, to get addicted.
If you grow up in a culture where people are playing a lot of video games,
you're more likely to try them more likely to get addicted.
So this nature nurture and neighborhood are the risk factors, but again,
people bring different degrees of vulnerability to this problem of addiction.
And some people are more vulnerable than others.
And you may indeed be in that category, or you're just some, somebody who,
you know, once you find something that's reinforcing for you,
you just go and you just wanna do it again. And again, and again, when you say.
Reinforcing, what do you mean.
By that? I mean, that it's rewarding in some way rewarding, right?
So it's, it's, it's pleasurable at first.
Now the thing about addiction and the way that it changes our brains is that
that thing that initially is pleasurable and has us engaging in approach
behaviors.
If we continue to consume that substance or engage in that behavior,
it ultimately actually puts us in a dopamine deficit state,
such that we want to continue to do that behavior, not to feel good,
but just to stop feeling bad. Mm.
And that's kind of one of the fundamental things about the disease of addiction.
It's innate vulnerability to start added to the
changes that occur in the brain as a result of ongoing consumption
of our drug and those brain changes are what drive continued compulsive.
Use.
So that's the difference between being enthusiastic about something that you
enjoy versus something that consumes your life.
So you're kind of chasing the dragon, like the initial fir,
like that's what they talk about it with heroin addiction, right?
Don't they say chasing the dragon. Yeah.
The initial rush that you get from the first, um,
uses of it, you're always chasing that,
but really what you're doing later on in life is just trying to not be sick.
Yes. Not having it in your body makes you feel too terrible.
Right. So, so interesting that that term chasing the dragon,
it comes in part from, as you describe,
like the elusiveness of trying to recreate that initial high,
which with continued use becomes harder and harder,
but it also literally comes from when heroin is inhaled.
So if you put it on a piece of tinfoil and you lighted underneath you get this
kind of smoke, then that plume looks like a Dragon's tale. Oh. So it's,
it's got a couple of different meanings, but yes. Um, I mean,
what you're saying is exactly right.
And the way that I describe this to patients and describe it to medical students
is imagine that in your brain, there's a balance, um,
kind of like a teeter-totter and a key its playground.
And one of the most interesting findings in neuroscience in the past 75 years is
that pleasure and pain are co-located, which means the same parts of our brain.
That process pleasure also process pain.
And they work like opposite sides of a balance.
So when we do something that's rewarding or reinforcing or pleasurable
are balanced tips slightly to the side of pleasure,
we get a little release of dopamine,
the pleasure neurotransmitter in that part of our brain, our reward pathway.
And we feel good.
But the thing about that balance is that it wants to remain level and it,
and the brain will work very hard to restore a level balance or what's called
homeostasis.
And it does that by tipping the and equal and opposite amount to the side of
pain. So again,
the way the balance restores homeostasis is to tip to the opposite side.
That's the come down after using that moment of wanting to do it again,
the hangover,
if we wait long enough that feeling passes and balances restored,
but if we don't wait eight and we continue to use our drug again, and again,
we end up with a balance that's essentially weighted to the side of pain.
And I imagine that like these little neuro adaptation gremlins hopping on the
pain side of the balance, not very scientific. I know,
but the point is that with repeated use,
we get enough gremlins on the pain side of the balance to fill this whole room.
And then we're essentially working from a dopamine deficit state.
We've downregulated our own dopamine.
We've downregulated our own dopamine transmission and those gremlins like it on
the balance. So they don't get off after the hangovers or the acute withdrawal.
They can persist there for weeks to months to years,
which is why people with addiction,
even when their lives have become so much better will relapse because they're
not walking around with a level pleasure pain balance.
They're walking around with a balance tip to the side of pain.
They're experiencing the universal symptoms of withdrawal from any addictive
substance or behavior, anxiety, irritability, insomnia, dysphoria,
and intrusive thoughts of wanting to use their drug again.
Now with enough time elapsed, and again,
with people in people with severe addiction, it can take months to years.
Those neuro adaptation gremlins will hop off.
We will regenerate our own dopamine and our own dopamine receptors and,
and our level balance or homeostasis will be restored. Is it.
Scientific to call them.
Gremlins super scientific? <laugh>.
Watch the entire episode for free only on Spotify.